# Foreword

My! What would Kate Chopin say if she knew her landmark novel, _The Awakening_, had become one of Cita Press’s inaugural texts! An open-access online literary resource dedicated to women’s literature seems to be a most appropriate venue for Chopin’s novel, especially when we consider how far _The Awakening_ has come since it was first published in 1899, when it met with mixed reviews—reviews tending toward the highly critical. Although Chopin herself was a professional writer, an author who wrote to support her family following the untimely death of her husband, she would likely have marveled at the global reception her novel has commanded, necessitating an open-access resource to make her words available to readers around the world today and for generations to come.

Considered to be shocking, immoral, and at the very least, highly unconventional, _The Awakening_ faded into obscurity for most of the twentieth century. One of the less severe critical reviews claimed _The Awakening_ “is not a healthy book; if it points to any particular moral or teaches any lesson, the fact is not apparent,” and worse, regarding its protagonist Edna, who “does not love her husband. The poison of passion seems to have entered her system, with her mother’s milk.”(1). The critic’s concern with the book’s “health” seems to stem from the perception of Edna’s lack of love for her husband and the direction of her passion, which appears to point outside her marriage. Ah, but what of the novel’s moral or lesson? Is it really possible that Chopin, the same author of the short story, “The Storm,” who claimed that the “firm, elastic flesh” of her protagonist, Calixta, in the arms of a momentary lover, “was knowing for the first time its birthright, was like a creamy lily that the sun invites to contribute its breath and perfume to the undying life of the world.”(2). Surely Chopin’s lesson is couched within Edna Pontellier’s passion as she awakens, body and soul. What if the necessity of passion is the lesson?

Passion’s necessity may be one of the lessons we can take from Chopin’s controversial text, but certainly it is not the only lesson. The novel emerged from obscurity like a different kind of storm: taking the literary world to new heights and awareness of what women writers could do. The late 1960s and early 1970s brought _The Awakening_ into the mainstream. A time of enormous social upheaval, these years were a time of protest and reform: the Civil Rights Movement, the Vietnam War, the women’s movement, and more. College students in the United States and around the western world were asking new questions about the status quo and rejecting the answers they received from the generations ahead of them. Many women—college students and otherwise—were rethinking their mothers’ choices. _The Awakening_ provided a reverberating response to the calls for women’s autonomy and sexual freedom, as it provoked immediate questions about marriage, infidelity, freedom, and suicide. Scholars, students, and readers embraced the novel, as it spoke to so many women’s lived experiences. Conventional marriage, the novel seemed to say, took many forms—and love was not always a part of those forms. Love itself took many forms, and not all men were ready to reciprocate in the ways an autonomous, searching woman like Edna Pontellier needed. Women’s desire for freedom and the search for autonomy were now parts of the public discourse, though, and regardless of the outcome—for Edna, there could only be one—readers in the late twentieth century could begin to see other ways of being, of engaging the world around them, etched out in Chopin’s pages.

Today, _The Awakening_ is one of the most widely taught texts in the world. According to Columbia University’s Open Syllabus Project, the novel ranks within the top 100 texts among 933,000 of frequently taught books around the world. The Kate Chopin International Society (www.katechopin.org), an author society devoted to supporting Chopin’s works and related materials, boasts nearly a half a million visitors worldwide to its website every year. Clearly, even today Chopin fulfills a need among readers; she shows readers, as well as students and scholars alike, new ways of considering the world. Through Edna, she enables us to ask questions about the status quo—and to continue asking questions about it throughout our lives, because if you revisit _The Awakening_ after reading it a first time, inevitably you will find new phrases, new lines, new images that beg to ask new questions that are seemingly more relevant to wherever you are in your life today.

Maybe that phenomenon shouldn’t surprise us. A now-classic text should be able to adapt to the times—or to the specific times in our lives. But maybe the special quality of The Awakening is not its ability to adapt to us, but its ability to enable us to adapt to it—for surely freedom, autonomy, passion, and love are always of interest to readers. Maybe it enables us, Chopin’s readers, to keep asking the questions about being, long after Edna no longer swims in the sea of her transformation? Maybe _The Awakening_’s staying force is firmly grounded in its ability to offer the space for the questions themselves, as readers meet each new phase of their lives, well-equipped to face the unknown, just as Edna, when she swam out one last final time. Our unknowns may be less dramatic—at least for now, perhaps—but no less important and certainly no less symbolic.

No doubt Kate Chopin would have been delighted, or if not at the very least, amused, by the far-reaching, long-lasting value of her novel. However, during an age in which the status quo of gender roles and power relationships is under intense scrutiny and transformation, readers of women’s literature may also see the necessity of her novel—now as urgently as the wave that carried _The Awakening_ from the depths of obscurity decades ago.

Heather Ostman, PhD - President, Kate Chopin International Society, 29 January 2018, New York

1\. Chopin, Kate. “The Storm,” American Literature, AmericanLiterature.com/short-story/the-storm

2\. Notes from Bookland,” St Louis Daily Globe-Democrat (13 May 1899) :5 reprinted in The Awakening. Ed. Margo Culley. 3rd edition. Norton, 2018.
